GRI 302: Energy 2016
TOPIC STANDARD 302EFFECTIVE DATE: 1 JULY 2018
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Topic Standard
Effective Date
This Standard is effective for reports or other materials published on or after 1 July 2018
Responsibility
This Standard is issued by the Global Sustainability Standards Board (GSSB). Any feedback on the GRI Standards
can be submitted to gssbsecretariat@globalreporting.org for the consideration of the GSSB.
Due Process
This Standard was developed in the public interest and in accordance with the requirements of the GSSB Due
Process Protocol. It has been developed using multi-stakeholder expertise, and with regard to authoritative
intergovernmental instruments and widely held expectations of organizations relating to social, environmental, and
economic responsibilities.
Legal Liability
This document, designed to promote sustainability reporting, has been developed by the Global Sustainability
Standards Board (GSSB) through a unique multi-stakeholder consultative process involving representatives from
organizations and report information users from around the world. While the GRI Board of Directors and GSSB
encourage the use of the GRI Sustainability Reporting Standards (GRI Standards) and related Interpretations by all
organizations, the preparation and publication of reports based fully or partially on the GRI Standards and related
Interpretations are the full responsibility of those producing them. Neither the GRI Board of Directors, GSSB, nor
Stichting Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) can assume responsibility for any consequences or damages resulting
directly or indirectly from the use of the GRI Standards and related Interpretations in the preparation of reports, or the
use of reports based on the GRI Standards and related Interpretations.
Copyright and trademark notice
This document is copyright-protected by Stichting Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). The reproduction and distribution
of this document for information and/or use in preparing a sustainability report is permitted without prior permission
from GRI. However, neither this document nor any extract from it may be reproduced, stored, translated, or transferred
in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopied, recorded, or otherwise) for any other purpose
without prior written permission from GRI.
Global Reporting Initiative, GRI and logo, GSSB and logo, and GRI Sustainability Reporting Standards (GRI
Standards) and logo are trademarks of Stichting Global Reporting Initiative.
© 2023 GRI. All rights reserved.
ISBN 978-90-8866-105-1
3
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Content
7
1. Topic management disclosures 7
2. Topic disclosures 8
8
8
Introduction 4
1. Topic management disclosures 2. Topic disclosures Disclosure 302-1 Energy consumption within the organization Disclosure 302-2 Energy consumption outside of the organization 11
Disclosure 302-3 Energy intensity 13
Disclosure 302-4 Reduction of energy consumption 14
Disclosure 302-5 Reductions in energy requirement
4
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Introduction
GRI 302: Energy 2016 contains disclosures for organizations to report information about their energy-related impacts,
and how they manage these impacts.
The Standard is structured as follows:
•
Section 1 contains a requirement, which provides information about how the organization manages its energy-
related impacts.
•
Section 2 contains five disclosures, which provide information about the organization’s energy-related impacts.
•
The Glossary contains defined terms with a specific meaning when used in the GRI Standards. The terms are
underlined in the text of the GRI Standards and linked to the definitions.
•
The Bibliography lists references used in developing this Standard.
The rest of the Introduction section provides a background on the topic, an overview of the system of GRI Standards
and further information on using this Standard.
Background on the topic
This Standard addresses the topic of energy.
An organization can consume energy in various forms, such as fuel, electricity, heating, cooling or steam. Energy can
be self-generated or purchased from external sources and it can come from renewable sources (such as wind, hydro
or solar) or from non-renewable sources such as coal, petroleum or natural gas).
Using energy more efficiently and opting for renewable energy sources is essential for combating climate change and
for lowering an organization’s overall environmental footprint.
Energy consumption can also occur throughout the upstream and downstream activities connected with an
organization’s operations. This can include consumers’ use of products the organization sells, and the end-of-life
treatment of these products.
System of GRI Standards
This Standard is part of the GRI Sustainability Reporting Standards (GRI Standards). The GRI Standards enable an
organization to report information about its most significant impacts on the economy, environment, and people,
including impacts on their human rights, and how it manages these impacts.
The GRI Standards are structured as a system of interrelated standards that are organized into three series: GRI
Universal Standards, GRI Sector Standards, and GRI Topic Standards (see Figure 1 in this Standard).
Universal Standards: GRI 1, GRI 2 and GRI 3
GRI 1: Foundation 2021 specifies the requirements that the organization must comply with to report in accordance
with the GRI Standards. The organization begins using the GRI Standards by consulting GRI 1.
GRI 2: General Disclosures 2021 contains disclosures that the organization uses to provide information about its
reporting practices and other organizational details, such as its activities, governance, and policies.
GRI 3: Material Topics 2021 provides guidance on how to determine material topics. It also contains disclosures that
the organization uses to report information about its process of determining material topics, its list of material topics,
and how it manages each topic.
Sector Standards
The Sector Standards provide information for organizations about their likely material topics. The organization uses
the Sector Standards that apply to its sectors when determining its material topics and when determining what to
report for each material topic.
Topic Standards
The Topic Standards contain disclosures that the organization uses to report information about its impacts in relation
to particular topics. The organization uses the Topic Standards according to the list of material topics it has
determined using GRI 3.
5
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Figure 1. GRI Standards: Universal, Sector and Topic Standards
GRI Standards
Sector Standards
Universal Standards Topic Standards
Requirements and
principles for using the
GRI Standards
Disclosures about the
reporting organization
Disclosures and
guidance about the
organization's material
topics
Apply all three Universal
Standards to your reporting
Use the Sector Standards that
apply to your sectors
Select Topic Standards to report
specifc information on your
material topics
Using this Standard
This Standard can be used by any organization – regardless of size, type, sector, geographic location, or reporting
experience – to report information about its energy-related impacts.
An organization reporting in accordance with the GRI Standards is required to report the following disclosures if it has
determined energy to be a material topic:
•
Disclosure 3-3 in GRI 3: Material Topics 2021 (see clause 1.1 in this Standard);
•
Any disclosures from this Topic Standard that are relevant to the organization’s energy-related impacts
(Disclosure 302-1 through Disclosure 302-5).
See Requirements 4 and 5 in GRI 1: Foundation 2021.
Reasons for omission are permitted for these disclosures.
If the organization cannot comply with a disclosure or with a requirement in a disclosure (e.g., because the required
information is confidential or subject to legal prohibitions), the organization is required to specify the disclosure or the
requirement it cannot comply with, and provide a reason for omission together with an explanation in the GRI content
index. See Requirement 6 in GRI 1: Foundation 2021 for more information on reasons for omission.
If the organization cannot report the required information about an item specified in a disclosure because the item
(e.g., committee, policy, practice, process) does not exist, it can comply with the requirement by reporting this to be the
case. The organization can explain the reasons for not having this item, or describe any plans to develop it. The
disclosure does not require the organization to implement the item (e.g., developing a policy), but to report that the
item does not exist.
If the organization intends to publish a standalone sustainability report, it does not need to repeat information that it
has already reported publicly elsewhere, such as on web pages or in its annual report. In such a case, the
organization can report a required disclosure by providing a reference in the GRI content index as to where this
information can be found (e.g., by providing a link to the web page or citing the page in the annual report where the
information has been published).
6
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Requirements, guidance and defined terms
The following apply throughout this Standard:
Requirements are presented in bold font and indicated by the word 'shall'. An organization must comply with
requirements to report in accordance with the GRI Standards.
Requirements may be accompanied by guidance.
Guidance includes background information, explanations, and examples to help the organization better understand
the requirements. The organization is not required to comply with guidance.
The Standards may also include recommendations. These are cases where a particular course of action is
encouraged but not required.
The word ‘should’ indicates a recommendation, and the word ‘can’ indicates a possibility or option.
Defined terms are underlined in the text of the GRI Standards and linked to their definitions in the Glossary. The
organization is required to apply the definitions in the Glossary.
7
GRI 302: Energy 2016
1. Topic management disclosures
An organization reporting in accordance with the GRI Standards is required to report how it manages each of its
material topics.
An organization that has determined energy to be a material topic is required to report how it manages the topic using
Disclosure 3-3 in GRI 3: Material Topics 2021 (see clause 1.1 in this section).
This section is therefore designed to supplement – and not replace – Disclosure 3-3 in GRI 3.
1.1
The reporting organization shall report how it manages energy using Disclosure 3-3 in
GRI 3: Material Topics 2021.
The reporting organization can also explain whether it is subject to any country, regional, or
industry-level energy regulations and policies. Additionally, it can provide examples of these
regulations and policies.
REQUIREMENTS GUIDANCE
8
GRI 302: Energy 2016
2. Topic disclosures
Disclosure 302-1 Energy consumption within the
organization
REQUIREMENTS
The reporting organization shall report the following information:
a.
Total fuel consumption within the organization from non-renewable sources, in joules or
multiples, and including fuel types used.
b.
Total fuel consumption within the organization from renewable sources, in joules or
multiples, and including fuel types used.
c.
In joules, watt-hours or multiples, the total:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
electricity consumption
heating consumption
cooling consumption
steam consumption
d.
In joules, watt-hours or multiples, the total:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
electricity sold
heating sold
cooling sold
steam sold
e.
Total energy consumption within the organization, in joules or multiples.
f.
Standards, methodologies, assumptions, and/or calculation tools used.
g.
Source of the conversion factors used.
Compilation requirements
2.1
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-1, the reporting
organization shall:
2.1.1
2.1.2
2.1.3
2.1.4
avoid the double-counting of fuel consumption, when reporting self-generated
energy consumption. If the organization generates electricity from a non-
renewable or renewable fuel source and then consumes the generated
electricity, the energy consumption shall be counted once under fuel
consumption;
report fuel consumption separately for non-renewable and renewable fuel
sources;
only report energy consumed by entities owned or controlled by the
organization;
calculate the total energy consumption within the organization in joules or
multiples using the following formula:
9
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Total energy consumption within the organization
=
Non-renewable fuel consumed
+
Renewable fuel consumed
+
Electricity, heating, cooling, and steam purchased for consumption
+
Self-generated electricity, heating, cooling, and steam, which are not consumed (see
clause 2.1.1)
-
Electricity, heating, cooling, and steam sold
RECOMMENDATIONS 2.2
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-1, the reporting
organization should:
2.2.1
apply conversion factors consistently for the data disclosed;
2.2.2
use local conversion factors to convert fuel to joules, or multiples, when
possible;
2.2.3
use the generic conversion factors, when local conversion factors are
unavailable;
2.2.4
if subject to different standards and methodologies, describe the
approach to selecting them;
2.2.5
report energy consumption for a consistent group of entities. When
possible, the group of entities should also be consistent with the group of
entities used in Disclosures 305-1 and 305-2 of GRI 305: Emissions 2016;
2.2.6
where it aids transparency or comparability over time, provide a
breakdown of energy consumption data by:
2.2.6.1
business unit or facility;
2.2.6.2
country;
2.2.6.3
type of source (see definitions for the listing of non-renewable
sources and renewable sources);
2.2.6.4
type of activity.
GUIDANCE
Background
For some organizations, electricity is the only significant form of energy they consume. For
others, energy sources such as steam or water provided from a district heating plant or chilled
water plant can also be important.
Energy can be purchased from sources external to the organization or produced by the
organization itself (self-generated).
Non-renewable fuel sources can include fuel for combustion in boilers, furnaces, heaters,
turbines, flares, incinerators, generators and vehicles that are owned or controlled by the
organization. Non-renewable fuel sources cover fuels purchased by the organization. They also
include fuel generated by the organization’s activities – such as mined coal, or gas from oil and
gas extraction.
Renewable fuel sources can include biofuels, when purchased for direct use, and biomass in
sources owned or controlled by the organization.
Consuming non-renewable fuels is usually the main contributor to direct (Scope 1) GHG
emissions, which are reported in Disclosure 305-1 of GRI 305: Emissions 2016. Consuming
10
GRI 302: Energy 2016
purchased electricity, heating, cooling, and steam contributes to the organization’s energy
indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions, which are reported in Disclosure 305-2 of GRI 305:
Emissions 2016.
11
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Disclosure 302-2 Energy consumption outside of the
organization
REQUIREMENTS
RECOMMENDATIONS The reporting organization shall report the following information:
a.
Energy consumption outside of the organization, in joules or multiples.
b.
Standards, methodologies, assumptions, and/or calculation tools used.
c.
Source of the conversion factors used.
Compilation requirements
2.3
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-2, the reporting
organization shall exclude energy consumption reported in Disclosure 302-1.
2.4
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-2, the reporting organization
should:
2.4.1
GUIDANCE
if subject to different standards and methodologies, describe the approach to
2.4.2
selecting them;
list energy consumption outside of the organization, with a breakdown by
upstream and downstream categories and activities.
Guidance for Disclosure 302-2
The reporting organization can identify energy consumption outside of the organization by
assessing whether an activity’s energy consumption:
•
contributes significantly to the organization’s total anticipated energy consumption outside of
the organization;
•
offers potential for reductions the organization can undertake or influence;
•
contributes to climate change-related risks, such as financial, regulatory, supply chain,
product and customer, litigation, and reputational risks;
•
is deemed material by stakeholders, such as customers, suppliers, investors, or civil
society;
•
results from outsourced activities previously performed in-house, or that are typically
performed in-house by other organizations in the same sector;
•
has been identified as significant for the organization’s sector;
•
meets any additional criteria for determining relevance, developed by the organization or by
organizations in its sector.
The organization can use the following upstream and downstream categories and activities
from the ‘GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard’
for identifying relevant energy consumption outside of the organization (see reference [2] in the
Bibliography):
Upstream categories
1. Purchased goods and services
2. Capital goods
3. Fuel- and energy-related activities (not included in Disclosure 302-1)
4. Upstream transportation and distribution
5. Waste generated in operations
6. Business travel
7. Employee commuting
8. Upstream leased assets
Other upstream
Downstream categories
1. Downstream transportation and distribution
2. Processing of sold products
3. Use of sold products
12
GRI 302: Energy 2016
4. End-of-life treatment of sold products
5. Downstream leased assets
6. Franchises
7. Investments
Other downstream
For each of these categories and activities, the organization can calculate or estimate the
amount of energy consumed.
The organization can report energy consumption separately for non-renewable sources and
renewable sources.
Background
Energy consumption can occur outside an organization, i.e., throughout the organization’s
upstream and downstream activities associated with its operations.
This can include consumers’ use of products the organization sells, and the end-of-life
treatment of products.
Quantifying energy consumption outside of the organization can provide a basis for calculating
some of the relevant other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions in Disclosure 305-3 of GRI 305:
Emissions 2016.
13
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Disclosure 302-3 Energy intensity
REQUIREMENTS
RECOMMENDATIONS GUIDANCE
The reporting organization shall report the following information:
a.
Energy intensity ratio for the organization.
b.
Organization-specific metric (the denominator) chosen to calculate the ratio.
c.
Types of energy included in the intensity ratio; whether fuel, electricity, heating, cooling,
steam, or all.
d.
Whether the ratio uses energy consumption within the organization, outside of it, or
both.
Compilation requirements
2.5
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-3, the reporting
organization shall:
2.5.1
2.5.2
calculate the ratio by dividing the absolute energy consumption (the
numerator) by the organization-specific metric (the denominator);
if reporting an intensity ratio both for the energy consumed within the
organization and outside of it, report these intensity ratios separately.
2.6
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-3, the reporting organization
should, where it aids transparency or comparability over time, provide a breakdown of the
energy intensity ratio by:
2.6.1
2.6.2
2.6.3
2.6.4
business unit or facility;
country;
type of source (see definitions for the listing of non-renewable sources and
renewable sources);
type of activity.
Guidance for Disclosure 302-3
Intensity ratios can be provided for, among others:
•
products (such as energy consumed per unit produced);
•
services (such as energy consumed per function or per service);
•
sales (such as energy consumed per monetary unit of sales).
Organization-specific metrics (denominators) can include:
•
units of product;
•
production volume (such as metric tons, liters, or MWh);
•
size (such as m 2
floor space);
•
number of full-time employees;
•
monetary units (such as revenue or sales).
Background
metric.
Energy intensity ratios define energy consumption in the context of an organization-specific
These ratios express the energy required per unit of activity, output, or any other organization-
specific metric. Intensity ratios are often called normalized environmental impact data.
In combination with the organization’s total energy consumption, reported in Disclosures 302-1
and 302-2, energy intensity helps to contextualize the organization’s efficiency, including in
relation to other organizations.
See references [1] and [3] in the Bibliography.
14
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Disclosure 302-4 Reduction of energy consumption
REQUIREMENTS
2.7.2
RECOMMENDATIONS GUIDANCE
The reporting organization shall report the following information:
a.
Amount of reductions in energy consumption achieved as a direct result of
conservation and efficiency initiatives, in joules or multiples.
b.
Types of energy included in the reductions; whether fuel, electricity, heating, cooling,
steam, or all.
c.
Basis for calculating reductions in energy consumption, such as base year or baseline,
including the rationale for choosing it.
d.
Standards, methodologies, assumptions, and/or calculation tools used.
Compilation requirements
2.7
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-4, the reporting
organization shall:
2.7.1
exclude reductions resulting from reduced production capacity or
outsourcing;
describe whether energy reduction is estimated, modeled, or sourced from
direct measurements. If estimation or modeling is used, the organization shall
disclose the methods used.
2.8
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-4, the reporting organization
should, if subject to different standards and methodologies, describe the approach to
selecting them.
Guidance for Disclosure 302-4
The reporting organization can prioritize disclosing reduction initiatives that were implemented
in the reporting period, and that have the potential to contribute significantly to reductions. The
organization can describe reduction initiatives and their targets when reporting how it manages
this topic.
Reduction initiatives can include:
•
process redesign;
•
conversion and retrofitting of equipment;
•
changes in behavior;
•
operational changes.
The organization can report reductions in energy consumption by combining energy types, or
separately for fuel, electricity, heating, cooling, and steam.
The organization can also provide a breakdown of reductions in energy consumption by
individual initiatives or groups of initiatives.
15
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Disclosure 302-5 Reductions in energy requirements of
products and services
REQUIREMENTS
RECOMMENDATIONS The reporting organization shall report the following information:
a.
b.
c.
2.9
Reductions in energy requirements of sold products and services achieved during the
reporting period, in joules or multiples.
Basis for calculating reductions in energy consumption, such as base year or baseline,
including the rationale for choosing it.
Standards, methodologies, assumptions, and/or calculation tools used.
When compiling the information specified in Disclosure 302-5, the reporting organization
should:
2.9.1
GUIDANCE
if subject to different standards and methodologies, describe the approach to
2.9.2
selecting them;
refer to industry use standards to obtain this information, where available (such
as fuel consumption of cars for 100 km at 90 km/h).
Guidance for Disclosure 302-5
Use-oriented figures can include, for example, the energy requirements of a car or a computer.
Consumption patterns can include, for example, 10 percent less energy use per 100 km
travelled or per time unit (hour, average working day).
16
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Glossary
This glossary provides definitions for terms used in this Standard. The organization is required to apply these
definitions when using the GRI Standards.
The definitions included in this glossary may contain terms that are further defined in the complete GRI Standards
Glossary. All defined terms are underlined. If a term is not defined in this glossary or in the complete GRI Standards
Glossary, definitions that are commonly used and understood apply.
base year
historical datum (such as year) against which a measurement is tracked over time
baseline
starting point used for comparisons
Note: In the context of energy and emissions reporting, the baseline is the projected
energy consumption or emissions in the absence of any reduction activity.
conservation and efficiency initiative
organizational or technological modification that allows a defined process or task to be carried
out using less energy
Examples: conversion and retrofitting of equipment such as energy-efficient lighting,
elimination of unnecessary energy use due to changes in behavior, process
redesign
energy reduction
amount of energy no longer used or needed to carry out the same processes or tasks
Note: Energy reduction does not include overall reduction in energy consumption from
reducing production capacity or outsourcing organizational activities.
human rights
rights inherent to all human beings, which include, at a minimum, the rights set out in the United
Nations (UN) International Bill of Human Rights and the principles concerning fundamental
rights set out in the International Labour Organization (ILO) Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work
Source: United Nations (UN), Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights:
Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework, 2011;
modified
Note: See Guidance to 2-23-b-i in GRI 2: General Disclosures 2021 for more information
on ‘human rights’.
impact
effect the organization has or could have on the economy, environment, and people, including on
their human rights, which in turn can indicate its contribution (negative or positive) to sustainable
development
Note 1: Impacts can be actual or potential, negative or positive, short-term or long-term,
intended or unintended, and reversible or irreversible.
See section 2.1 in GRI 1: Foundation 2021 for more information on ‘impact’.
Note 2: material topics
topics that represent the organization’s most significant impacts on the economy, environment,
and people, including impacts on their human rights
Note: See section 2.2 in GRI 1: Foundation 2021 and section 1 in GRI 3: Material Topics
2021 for more information on ‘material topics’.
non-renewable energy source
energy source that cannot be replenished, reproduced, grown or generated in a short time
17
GRI 302: Energy 2016
period through ecological cycles or agricultural processes
Examples: coal; fuels distilled from petroleum or crude oil, such as gasoline, diesel fuel, jet
fuel, and heating oil; fuels extracted from natural gas processing and petroleum
refining, such as butane, propane, and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG); natural gas,
such as compressed natural gas (CNG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG); nuclear
power
renewable energy source
energy source that is capable of being replenished in a short time through ecological cycles or
agricultural processes
Examples: biomass, geothermal, hydro, solar, wind
sustainable development / sustainability
development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs
Source: World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future, 1987
Note: The terms ‘sustainability’ and ‘sustainable development’ are used interchangeably
in the GRI Standards.
Bibliography
18
GRI 302: Energy 2016
Bibliography
This section lists references used in developing this Standard.
References:
1.
2.
3.
World Resources Institute (WRI) and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), ‘GHG
Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard’, Revised Edition, 2004.
World Resources Institute (WRI) and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), ‘GHG
Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard’, 2011.
World Resources Institute (WRI) and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD),
‘Greenhouse Gas Protocol Accounting Notes, No. 1, Accounting and Reporting Standard Amendment’, 2012.
PO Box 10039
1001 EA Amsterdam
The Netherlands
www.globalreporting.org